.. method signatures added, because sphinx always use fully qualified type hints, which is not very
   pretty nor readable

.. module:: steputils.p21

===============
p21 - STEP-file
===============

STEP physical file representation (STEP-file) specified by the ISO 10303-21:2002 standard.

STEP-File is data exchange form of STEP. ISO 10303 can represent 3D objects in Computer-aided
design (CAD) and related information. Due to its ASCII structure, a STEP-file is easy to read, with typically one
instance per line. The format of a STEP-File is defined in ISO 10303-21 Clear Text Encoding of the Exchange Structure.

ISO 10303-21:2002 defines the encoding mechanism for representing data conforming to a particular schema in the
EXPRESS data modeling language specified in ISO 10303-11. A STEP-File is also called p21-File and STEP Physical
File. The file extensions .stp and .step indicate that the file contains data conforming to STEP Application
Protocols while the extension .p21 should be used for all other purposes.

Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_10303-21

A summery of ISO 10303-21 can be viewed online at the `Library of Congress`_. The final draft of `ISO 10303-21;2016`_
is online available at `STEP Tools, Inc.`_.

`ISO 10303-21;2016`_ is **not** supported yet!

The intended usage is to import the :mod:`p21` module and create new objects by factory functions:

.. code-block:: python

   from steputils import p21

   FNAME = "example.p21"

   # Create a new STEP-file:
   stepfile = p21.new_step_file()

   # Create a new data section:
   data = stepfile.new_data_section()

   # Add entity instances to data section:
   data.add(p21.simple_instance('#1', name='APPLICATION', params=('MyApp', 'v1.0')))

   # Set required header entities:
   stepfile.header.set_file_description(('Example STEP file', 'v1.0'))
   stepfile.header.set_file_name(name=FNAME, organization=('me', 'myself'), autorization='me')
   # A file schema has to be defined explicit, list all used file schemas.
   stepfile.header.set_file_schema(('NONE',))

   # Write STEP-file to file system:
   stepfile.save(FNAME)

   # Read an existing file from file system:
   try:
       stepfile = p21.readfile(FNAME)
   except IOError as e:
       print(str(e))
   except p21.ParseError as e:
       # Invalid STEP-file or unsupported version
       print(str(e))
   else:
       print(f'File {FNAME} is a valid STEP-file (ISO 10303-21;2002).')

Loader Functions
----------------

.. autofunction:: readfile(filename: str) -> StepFile

.. autofunction:: load(fp: TextIO) -> StepFile

.. autofunction:: loads(s: str) -> StepFile

Factory Functions
-----------------

.. autofunction:: new_step_file() -> StepFile

.. autofunction:: simple_instance(ref: str, name: str, params) -> SimpleEntityInstance

.. autofunction:: simple_entity_instance(ref: str, entity:Entity) -> SimpleEntityInstance

.. autofunction:: complex_entity_instance(ref: str, entities: List[Entity]) -> ComplexEntityInstance

.. autofunction:: entity(name: str, params) -> Entity

.. autofunction:: keyword(name: str) -> Keyword

.. autofunction:: reference(ref: str) -> Reference

.. autofunction:: parameter_list(*args) -> ParameterList

.. autofunction:: unset_parameter(char: str) -> UnsetParameter

.. autofunction:: typed_parameter(type_name: str, param) -> TypedParameter

.. autofunction:: enum(enum: str) -> Enumeration

.. autofunction:: binary(value: int, unset: int = 0) -> Binary

.. autofunction:: timestamp

Type Checker Functions
----------------------

.. autofunction:: is_string

.. autofunction:: is_integer

.. autofunction:: is_real

.. autofunction:: is_binary

.. autofunction:: is_reference

.. autofunction:: is_keyword

.. autofunction:: is_enum

.. autofunction:: is_unset_parameter

.. autofunction:: is_typed_parameter

.. autofunction:: is_parameter_list

   Note: It is a single parameter if it's not a :class:`ParameterList`

.. autofunction:: is_entity

.. autofunction:: is_simple_entity_instance

.. autofunction:: is_complex_entity_instance


Classes
-------

Create new instances by the associated factory function!

StepFile
~~~~~~~~

.. class:: StepFile

    STEP physical file representation (STEP-file). Create new STEP-files by factory function :func:`new_step_file`.

    A STEP-File has one :class:`HeaderSection`, and at least one :class:`DataSection`.

    .. attribute:: header

        Header section as :class:`HeaderSection` object.

    .. attribute:: data

        List of data sections as :class:`DataSection` objects

    .. automethod:: __getitem__(ref: Reference) -> EntityInstance

    .. automethod:: __iter__() -> Iterable[EntityInstance]

    .. automethod:: __len__

    .. automethod:: __str__

    .. automethod:: get(ref: Reference) -> Optional[EntityInstance]

    .. automethod:: new_data_section(params: Iterable = None) -> DataSection

    .. automethod:: append(data: DataSection) -> None

    .. automethod:: save

    .. automethod:: write

    .. automethod:: has_reference


HeaderSection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

 The HEADER section has a fixed structure consisting of 3 to 6 groups in the given order. Except for the data fields
 time_stamp and FILE_SCHEMA all fields may contain empty strings.

 :code:`FILE_DESCRIPTION(description: ParameterList, implementation_level: str)`

     - ``description``
     - ``implementation_level``: The version and conformance option of this file. Possible versions are "1" for the
       original standard back in 1994, ``'2'`` for the technical corrigendum in 1995 and "3" for the second edition.
       The conformance option is either ``'1'`` for internal and ``'2'`` for external mapping of complex entity instances.
       Often, one will find here the value ``'2;1'``. The value ``'2;2'`` enforcing external mapping is also possible
       but only very rarely used. The values ``'3;1'`` and ``'3;2'`` indicate extended STEP-Files as defined in the
       2001 standard with several DATA sections, multiple schemas and ``FILE_POPULATION`` support.


 :code:`FILE_NAME(name: str, time_stamp: str, author: str, organization: ParameterList,`
 :code:`preprocessor_version: ParameterList, originating_system: str, authorization: str)`

     - ``name`` of this exchange structure. It may correspond to the name of the file in a file system or reflect
       data in this file. There is no strict rule how to use this field.
     - ``time_stamp`` indicates the time when this file was created. The time is given in the international data time
       format ISO 8601, e.g. 2003-12-27T11:57:53 for 27 of December 2003, 2 minutes to noon time.
     - ``author`` the name and mailing address of the person creating this exchange structure
     - ``organization`` the organization to whom the person belongs to
     - ``preprocessor_version`` the name of the system and its version which produces this STEP-file
     - ``originating_system`` the name of the system and its version which originally created the information
       contained in this STEP-file.
     - ``authorization`` the name and mailing address of the person who authorized this file.

 :code:`FILE_SCHEMA(schema: ParameterList)`

     - Specifies one or several Express schema governing the information in the data section(s). For first edition
       files, only one EXPRESS schema together with an optional ASN.1 object identifier of the schema version can
       be listed here. Second edition files may specify several EXPRESS schema.
     - If data sections have names and schema defined, `FILE_SCHEMA` will be created automatically from the data
       sections attributes, if data sections do not have `schema` attribute, define a general file schema by
       :meth:`HeaderSection.set_file_schema`.

 The last three header groups are only valid in second edition files.

 :code:`FILE_POPULATION(governing_schema: str, determination_method: str, governed_sections: ParameterList)` (?)

 Indicating a valid population (set of entity instances) which conforms
 to an EXPRESS schemas. This is done by collecting data from several data_sections and referenced instances from
 other data sections.

     - ``governing_schema``, the EXPRESS schema to which the indicated population belongs to and by which it can
       be validated.
     - ``determination_method`` to figure out which instances belong to the population. Three methods are predefined:
       ``'SECTION_BOUNDARY'``, ``'INCLUDE_ALL_COMPATIBLE'``, and ``'INCLUDE_REFERENCED'``.
     - ``governed_sections``, the data sections whose entity instances fully belongs to the population.

 The concept of FILE_POPULATION is very close to schema_instance of SDAI. Unfortunately, during the
 Standardization process, it was not possible to come to an agreement to merge these concepts. Therefore,
 JSDAI adds further attributes to FILE_POPULATION as intelligent comments to cover all missing information
 from schema_instance. This is supported for both import and export.

 :code:`SECTION_LANGUAGE(language: str)` (?)

 HeaderSection['SECTION_LANGUAGE'] allows assignment of a default language for either all or a specific
 data section. This is needed for those Express schemas that do not provide the capability to specify in which
 language string attributes of entities such as name and description are given.

 :code:`SECTION_CONTEXT(context: ParameterList)` (?)

 Provide the capability to specify additional context information for all
 or single data sections. This can be used e.g. for STEP-APs to indicate which conformance class is covered by
 a particular data section.

.. class:: HeaderSection

    A :class:`StepFile` has always one header section as attribute :attr:`StepFile.header`.

    .. attribute:: entities

        Ordered dict of all header entities as :class:`Entity` objects.

    .. automethod:: __getitem__(name: str) -> Entity

    .. automethod:: __contains__(name: str) -> bool

    .. automethod:: get(name: str) -> Optional[Entity]

    .. automethod:: add(self, entity: Entity) -> None

    .. automethod:: set_file_description(description: Tuple = None, level: str = '2;1') -> None

    .. automethod:: set_file_name(name: str, time_stamp: str = None, author: str = '', organization: Tuple = None, preprocessor_version: Tuple = None, organization_system: str = '', autorization: str = '') -> None

    .. automethod:: set_file_schema(schema: Iterable) -> None



DataSection
~~~~~~~~~~~

 The DATA section contains application data according to one specific express schema. The encoding of this data
 follows some simple principles.

 Source of Documentation: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_10303-21

 Every entity instance in the exchange structure is given a unique name in the form ``'#1234'``.
 The instance name must consist of a positive number (>0) and is typically smaller than 263. The instance name
 is only valid locally within the STEP-file. If the same content is exported again from a system the instance
 names may be different for the same instances. The instance name is also used to reference other entity
 instances through attribute values or aggregate members. The referenced instance may be defined before or
 after the current instance.

 Instances of single entity data types are represented by writing the name of the entity in capital letters and then
 followed by the attribute values in the defined order within parentheses. See e.g. ``#16=PRODUCT(...)`` above.

 Instances of complex entity data types are represented in the STEP file by using either the internal mapping or
 the external mapping.
 External mapping has always to be used if the complex entity instance consist of more than one leaf entity.
 In this case all the single entity instance values are given independently from each other in alphabetical
 order as defined above with all entity values grouped together in parentheses.
 Internal mapping is used by default for conformance option 1 when the complex entity instance consists of
 only one leaf entity. The encoding is similar to the one of a single entity instance with the additional order
 given by the subtype definition.

 Mapping of attribute values:

 Only explicit attributes get mapped. Inverse, Derived and re-declared attributes are not listed since their
 values can be deduced from the other ones. Unset attribute values are given as ``$``.
 Explicit attributes which got re-declared as derived in a subtype are encoded as ``*`` in the position of the
 supertype attribute.

 Mapping of other data types:

 Enumeration, boolean and logical values are given in capital letters with a leading and trailing dot such as
 ``.TRUE.``.
 String values are given in ``'``. For characters with a code greater than 126 a special encoding is used. The
 character sets as defined in ISO 8859 and 10646 are supported. Note that typical 8 (e.g. west European) or
 16 (Unicode) bit character sets cannot directly be taken for STEP-file strings. They have to be decoded
 in a very special way.
 Integers and real values are used identical to typical programming languages
 Binary values (bit sequences) are encoded as hexadecimal and surrounded by double quotes, with a leading
 character indicating the number of unused bits (0, 1, 2, or 3) followed by uppercase hexadecimal encoding of
 data. It is important to note that the entire binary value is encoded as a single hexadecimal number, with
 the highest order bits in the first hex character and the lowest order bits in the last one.
 The elements of aggregates (SET, BAG, LIST, ARRAY) are given in parentheses, separated by ``,``.
 Care has to be taken for select data types based on defined data types. Here the name of the defined data
 type gets mapped too.

.. class:: DataSection

    A :class:`StepFile` has a ``list`` of data sections as attribute :attr:`StepFile.data`. A new STEP-file
    has no data sections, create at least one by factory function :meth:`StepFile.new_data_section`.

    .. attribute:: parameter

        Each data section can have associated parameters stored in attribute :attr:`parameter`.

    .. attribute:: instances

        Ordered dict of all entity instances of this data section. Key is the name of instance as a string
        (e.g. ``'#100'``), values are :class:`EntityInstance` objects.

    .. automethod:: __getitem__(ref: str) -> EntityInstance

    .. automethod:: __iter__

    .. automethod:: get(ref: str) -> Optional[EntityInstance]

    .. automethod:: __len__() -> int

    .. automethod:: references() -> Iterable[Reference]

    .. automethod:: add(instance: EntityInstance) -> None

Helper Classes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. autoclass:: ParameterList

.. autoclass:: Reference

.. autoclass:: Keyword

.. autoclass:: Enumeration

.. autoclass:: Binary

    .. attribute:: value

        Value as ``int``.

    .. attribute:: unset

        Count of unset bits in the range from 0 to 3.

.. autoclass:: UnsetParameter

.. autoclass:: TypedParameter

    .. attribute:: type_name

        Type name as :class:`Keyword`

    .. attribute:: param

.. autoclass:: Entity

    .. attribute:: name

        Entity name as :class:`Keyword`

    .. attribute:: params

        Entity parameters as :class:`ParameterList`.

.. autoclass:: SimpleEntityInstance

    .. attribute:: ref

        Instance name as :class:`Reference`

    .. attribute:: entity

        Instance entity as :class:`Entity`.

.. autoclass:: ComplexEntityInstance

    .. attribute:: ref

        Instance name as :class:`Reference`

    .. attribute:: entities

        Instance entities as list of :class:`Entity` objects.

.. _Library of Congress:  https://www.loc.gov/preservation/digital/formats/fdd/fdd000448.shtml

.. _ISO 10303-21;2016: http://www.steptools.com/stds/step/IS_final_p21e3.html

.. _STEP Tools, Inc.: http://www.steptools.com/